Have a good for time, but it'd be great.
But leave time for of questions if you can.
Yeah. Thank you. Um, I'm Claudia Inger.
I'm one of the commissioners on the
New Zealand Law Commission.
Um, we thought given the level of overlap
between the chisel judgment
and the issues that we canvas in our report,
that it was appropriate for us to come
and offer what assistance we can to the committee.
Our formal role ends when we submit a report,
and we do not advocate for implementation of our work.
So I'm not here to advocate, I'm just simply here
to provide what assistance I can.
In fact, when I say bye, I mean him
because I'm gonna hand over to my colleague Thomas Burt,
who's going to present the submission and, um, take the lead
and answer any questions.
Cool.
Good afternoon. Um, from myself.
Um, I'll try
and be as helpful as I can to the committee by explaining
how our recent report on preventive detention, extended
supervision orders and public protection orders relates
to the findings the Supreme Court made in the Chisel case.
Um, I'll keep my statement brief
and take our written submission as read,
if that's agreeable to you.
Yep. That's, and I'll just provide a little bit of context
of our review and then we can jump
to questions you may have.
Cool. Um, we commenced our review of the Law
of Preventive Detention, esos and PPOs
after the Court of Appeal had issued its, uh, judgment, um,
in 2022.
Um, we then, uh, undertook two rounds
of public consultation.
First on, um,
the issues we had had identified with the current law.
Second, with our draft recommendations to address them.
And throughout the process, we engaged with stakeholders,
experts, academics.
We submitted our final report to the Ministers of Justice
and Corrections in March last year.
And, um, that was, uh, four months
after the Supreme Court released its decision in Chisel.
Um, that was an intentional decision to wait for
that decision to come out so we could take it into account
for our final recommendations.
We, as we said in our, um, written submissions are confident
that, um, implementing our recommendations would both, uh,
meet both address the, uh,
human rights inconsistencies the Supreme Court has, um,
found and improve public safety.
I'll just say a little bit about what's in the final report.
Uh, the main issues we identified are, um,
the ongoing human rights challenges.
Uh, it with regarding to the sentence
of preventive detention, uh,
before the UN Human Rights Committee, and regarding esos
and PPOs before the domestic courts.
In addition to those human rights challenges,
we identified substantial fragmentation issues in
how the three relevant statutes, the Sentencing Act,
the Parole Act, and the Public Safety,
public Protection Orders Act overlap and work together.
There were several inconsistencies
because of the piecemeal way,
how those three statutes had developed over time.
The key recommendation we made in the report was
to repeal the current law, replace it with a new act,
and that that new act should only provide
for post sentence orders,
not a sentence like preventive detention.
We recommend carrying over several aspects
of the existing ESO and PPO regime into the new act,
but to improve it in some key areas.
That would, um, be the context I'd provide to you for now,
and I'm happy to answer any questions you may have.
Okay. We've got lots of lawyers in the room, um, right.
Who wants to kick off?
We go. No, I'm, I'm happy with that. Okay.
Oh yeah. Go. Um, Ms. Walter,
Um, thank you.
And thank you for the, uh, the table at the end
of your submission, which I found really helpful comparing
the chisel recommendations with your as well.
Um, one of the decision points in Sal was the reflection on,
um, retrospective application.
And I didn't see that unless I missed it in the table.
Did you have a recommendation on that
and whether there was a way,
'cause the decision was fairly definitive on that front.
Um, and then I've just got a second question as well.
Shall I answer that one first? Yeah.
Um, we did think quite a lot about
retrospective application.
Um, the details are in chapter 19 of our report,
we recommended that other Department
of Corrections is best place, best place
to make the call on transitional provisions
as it has significant resourcing implications.
What we did in our report is step through each scenario,
um, of which person is subject to which order,
whether it was, um, imposed, retrospectively,
or pro prospectively to begin with.
And according to the Supreme Court judgment,
what can be done in terms of transitional arrangements?
The Supreme Court in Chisel did, um,
exhaustively say that
any preventive measure involving detention
that is imposed retrospectively cannot be justified,
which limits the options.
Okay. So, so am I correct
that you are saying it potentially could be a case by case,
though, in terms of assessing the particular order,
the particular conditions,
but also potentially the particular risk in that case, the,
for the transition range for the transitions? Yeah,
That's right.
Um, and the second question was, um,
you made the point about it being post sentence.
You would've seen the Law Society's proposal that you,
one option was to do it as a conditional
provision attached to sentencing.
Um, is, could, could you just speak to the rationale
behind excluding that as an option?
Happy, happy to do that? Yes.
Um, before reaching our conclusion that, um,
our recommendation was going
to be an only post sentence order regime, we did step
through all alternatives we could conceive of, um,
including the one that, um, law Society, um,
brought up in their submission.
Our key reason for, um,
recommending a post sentence regime is that alternatives
that, um, add a mechanism to sentencing
do not necessarily fully address the issue
of a second punishment.
There's still a possibility
that the courts would find the subsequent imposition
of a measure to be a second punishment
despite it originating at the point of sentencing.
Right. The second issue we
identified with that approach is, um, if imposing
that measure, its sentencing without yet being able
to take into account whether the person,
the relevant person would go
through a rehabilitative journey in prison
or the opposite, um, be, um, uh, show signs
of a higher re-offending risk, it would not be possible
to take those conditions into account
at the point of sentencing.
Um, having a preliminary measure imposed
that can be later invalidated also risks making the path
seem like a fatal contemplate that is geared towards, um,
that person later on having that measure imposed.
Those were our main reason reasons for, um,
preferring the post sentence regime, uh, related
and secondary reason is
having only one point in time
where measures can be imposed mm-hmm.
Is the best setting for the court to be able to
assess all available measures in, uh, the full spectrum
of restrictiveness in one point in time without having
to make speculations
what order may be imposed at a later point in time,
how the person's risk will develop over time.
Uh, and I think that makes sense. Just outta curiosity.
Does, does any other jurisdiction do this in a way that has
that sentencing conditional measure imposed,
or is the most common way of approaching it post sentencing?
There is a range of approaches overseas,
and it's actually quite difficult
to discern a majority pathway or a,
or a best practice example.
Um, England and Wales, Canada
and, uh, Scotland, I believe all have, um, imposition
of preventive measures at sentencing.
Most Australian jurisdictions do it post sentence order,
but also at sentencing, we found that none
of those were convincing examples to lead us, uh,
to develop a best practice example.
They all, um, come with their own issues
and human rights litigation.
Okay. Cool. Any other questions from any members?
Um, just let's not back. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um, can we just get down to the basics here?
So, we are dealing with situations where we've got victims
of very serious offending.
So we wanna make sure these victims are protected from the
real high risk of re-offending.
And all I'm hearing about is the human rights
of these people that have enacted these disgusting,
horrible crimes against victims.
And I get it, human rights is something that should be
protected, but I keep coming back to the victims
and what, what we're trying to be convinced
that we should change in this matter
is extra protection for victims.
Mm-hmm. What do you have to say to that?
Please help me through that.
Um, I'll just, um, talk
to the reasoning we adopted in, in our report.
Yep. And that was that the important balancing act,
uh, to achieve in this area is between public safety
of the community on the one hand,
and the liberty rights of those subject
to preventive measures.
It is, um, uh, chapter three of our report deals
with the very first question, is there a need
to have something like preventive measures in place
to protect the community?
And our conclusion was, yes, that is necessary.
Most other, um, all other comparative jurisdictions
that we looked at have some form of measure.
And, um, were, were not for that measure.
That'd be, um, a risk of a very small group
of highly dangerous, um, offenders
to re-offend once they're released from a,
from a sentence of imprisonment.
As I said before, this public safety objective needs to be
balanced, um, with the human rights
of the individual person subject to a measure.
And what we found in developing our recommendations is
that usually the, the measures
that best achieve human rights consistency are also the best
measures to achieve public safety long term.
What I mean by that is, um, emphasizing the need
for rehabilitative programs
and, um, uh, a careful consideration of how a person,
uh, can attend programs
and make progress in their rehabilitative journey is
also a public safety.
Can I just add a little to that?
Just, um, in case it's not clear under the scheme
that we proposed all the same, like, types
of disposition would still be available all the way
through from a community based order
to detention in a secure facility to detention in prison if,
if people could not be managed in a secure facility.
And one of the things we were trying to do was to ensure
that all the measures that we know
that corrections find useful to have,
are on a very secure legislative footing.
Um, so that's another sort of thing underlying the report.
And as Thomas said, we were satisfied that by providing for
that secure legislative footing
and for by increasing opportunities for rehabilitation,
we would be improving public safety outcomes.
Okay. Let's store close here
because we've got three more submitters.
Um, I would suggest some members,
let's keep that theme going.
Um, it's very useful,
but thank you for making the opportunity
and actually turning up right now we've got Mr.
Mc, uh, Mr. Uh, Knight here. We've seen you before.
Mr. Knight. Yes. Nice to have you back.
We've got roughly 10 minutes ago. Thank you,
Committee. Um,
as you probably know, I'm a professor of Laura,
aka Victoria University with specialism within, uh,
constitutional law and government law.
And I am grateful for the opportunity to address you.
But, um, my submission's a little different
because I won't talk about PPOs or esos
'cause I have no particular claim to expertise on
that aspect of criminal justice.
But I would rather invite you
to reflect on the overarching issue of how you
as a parliamentary committee should respond to the advice
provided by the courts through a declaration as a matter
of general principle, political conscience or morality.
And my aim is, is hopefully that we might be able
to engender some form
of conventional expectation about parliament's posture
to the special process of constitutional dialogue, which is,
um, enlivened by, uh, these types of declarations.
And here, I, in my submission, I pointed to a convention
of the peers to be have developed in the uk,
which might be valuable,
but I think is one
that probably doesn't quite fit our constitutional setting.
So my specific recommendation is that the committee, uh,
should think about articulating some general principles,
speaking to how it might respond within the current
constitutional framework covered in standing order
processes, but the rights act
and the principle parliamentary sovereignty
more than simply doubling down on an impugned piece
of legislation, but less than blindly
or always adopting the court's advice
as a matter of formality.
There's a middle ground to be chartered here,
and I wanna recognize that that's something
that might require a bit of work
and conversation beyond the bounds of this, uh,
present matter before you in relation to PPOs and the sos.
And I'm suggesting you might consider appointing a
specialist advisor on the issue,
or even commencing a separate inquiry on that general point.
'cause I recognize that conversation's a, a tricky one,
but an important one because it's the meta
conversation that's in play here.
So I, if I illustrate this by, um, uh, sketching some
of the principles that I've suggested and, and they're
provided only on a very tentative, uh, sketch
because the things I'm still reflecting on
as this new remedy is finding its feet.
And my suggestion is the principle should be procedural
or perhaps better describes deliberative only,
not substantially saying
that you should necessarily follow the,
the court's advice in these circumstances,
but thinking about how you go about thinking
and grappling with it.
And, and those principles should be consistent
with the notions of institutional dialogue
and deliberation that catalyze what is a really unusual
constitutional judicial remedy in play here.
The courts don't have this opportunity very often
to speak directly to parliament,
and we expect there's a gear shift
on parliament's part in response.
I'm asking you to think, think about how you might capture
that in your deliberation on a case by case basis,
while also not ignoring
that formally parliament has retained the full power
to make laws under the parliamentary.
So, uh, under the principle of parliamentary sovereignty.
So the, the, the sketch that I've got are things like
consideration of the advice
with an open-minded good faith in a way that engages with,
in detail with the judicial reasoning.
And at least for those first two, that might be able
to be taken as a given.
But I think it's useful in spelling that out.
I suggest the need for reasons
and reasons which are logical, principled,
and generally proportionate to the gravity of the rights
and play, and perhaps reflecting the standard structured
proportionality analysis that is now commonplace in human
rights of pay or by judicial bodies,
attorneys general, and things like that.
But I'm not also wedded to the need
to speak in legal lexicon
because I recognize that
parliament speaks with different voice.
I think importantly, there is a need
to take care about disagreements about the underlying flax
and evidence because you've got the benefit
of a advice from a judicial body on these points.
And I'm suggesting you one possibility is there might be a
need to accept adequate
or receive adequate contrary evidence
and make specific factual findings if you wish to
disagree on that matter, as is your prerogative.
But I think you need to, uh,
have an evidential foundation from that.
And, um, it may be that that's helped by reports
of the law commission, like in this case,
which has done the heavy lifting there.
So you can, you can draw on
that evidential fa findings if you want
to make contrary recommendations
or findings, uh,
different from the Supreme Court on those factual matters
separate from the evaluative matters.
I should also add, because of this inquiry in the way
that's been constituted, um, I wonder as a matter
of principle, whether you might also want
to routinely seek open
and public submissions on these responses.
My understanding is that these ones have only been done
by invitation only to specific groups.
And I think when we're dealing with a response and,
and, uh, uh, to a declaration in this way, there is a role
for the community at large to be able to speak in
that conversation, which is anticipated.
So, um, uh, they're just some working suggestions.
I'm happy to pick up that
conversation on any of those points.
But, but just to close with the, the basic points
formally there, there are two polemic positions.
Parliament and its committees might adopt
as a posture when responding
to advice from the courts about human rights
through a declaration and consistency.
On the one hand, parliament can quickly double down
and condone the impugned legislation as a matter,
as parliamentary sovereignty allows.
On the other hand, parliament could
or could be expected to fully hate the advice in the name
of protecting human rights.
What I'm saying is declarations inconsistency have developed
as a middle way through those polar positions where
in theory, at least advices offered grappled with
and responded to in a meaningful way, sometimes
with legitimate disagreement.
With that advice. Important, uh, postscript there,
my main suggestion, the C committee should think about
spelling out some working expectations about
how it should work in practice in that middle space.
Good. Good. Now got Dr. Sue, first question.
Thank you, chip. Um, thank you so much joining us.
That's really interesting. Um, I have a couple of questions,
I guess, um, obviously in terms of the way
that the Parliament looks at declaration
of inconsistencies is reasonably new.
This is only the second case we'll look at.
So there hasn't been really a broad pool to draw on,
and particularly when you're looking at the processes
that's laid out in Appendix F of the standing orders.
I guess my first question is,
is this something you have submitted
to the Standing Orders review?
Say that? Can you just say your question again? Uh,
Is this something that, uh, that the submitted that, uh,
that Dr. Knight has submitted to the standing orders review?
Because that Yeah,
I I'm in your hands on, on whether it, where,
where it's taken, I submitted on the, the, the,
the construction of the process,
but not this round of the standing orders review.
I think it's a matter for this committee
because in principle, you are the, the, the, the, the,
the at the vanguard of this point.
And it's appropriate for you as your members, I think,
to be thinking in the context of particular declarations.
How do I want respond?
These responding to useful way to think about
that I think is if you're a minority voice on a committee
position in relation to response declaration,
what would you expect of your majority members in terms
of process and deliberation?
Which is the best way to think about how,
how is there a expected practice? But yeah,
I guess, you know, to that point, one
of the things you often say,
and in this particular ruling, there were as sending voices
by the Supreme Court as well, whether it actually then
for any deliberation, maybe
by this select committee when it comes to Declaration
of Independence, like other sort of non-partisan committees
that we see in Parliament, um, you know, reg Regs review,
um, petitions, you know, to give a few examples
that there should be a different mechanism that is in place
than what is currently being placed in front
of a thematic select committee.
Um, is that something that is a consideration?
I would say you,
this committee is sitting in a slightly different capacity
when it's responding your declaration
because of the uniqueness of what you get to consider.
Yeah, I'm not sure it's a,
that you can strip out the politics, for example, out of it,
because I don't think that's
what human rights jurisprudence requires,
because there is a, there is always gonna be a balancing
between that, that balance
that was described in the previous submission.
And, and, and people will take positions on that as an,
as a substantive matter.
What I'm inviting you to think about is whether as a matter
of processing, engaging in that conversation as a committee
and later on a parliament, do you want to, uh,
chart some of best practice about how,
how to have those conversations.
Mm-hmm. And this is why I don't think it's necessarily best
to express it in standing orders
and to over redify it with processes.
This is a matter of, for you as parliamentarians,
as your matter of, you know, civic morality and conscience.
How do you want to be thinking, debating, deliberating on,
on those fundamental matters?
We've got advice from an expert body, externally
and un unusual circumstances.
All right. Think we might try that too, coach.
But hey, thank you very much for your, um,
submission, professor.
Thank you. And, uh, please keep going back to the committee.
Always very helpful. Good.
Right now we're going to the Law Association by Zoom.
Is that correct?
Well, hopefully
I'm not what I was supposed to be doing.
Uh, somebody asked if I wanted, um, to
join you as a panelist.
I, I'm on the list on behalf of the, uh, the, uh,
law Association of New Zealand.
So if I've pressed something wrong
and I'm interfering with you, please just zoom me out again.
I'm not sure if I'm next in line.
Yeah, you are next in line. Oh,
Thank you. Here we go.
We we're, we, you're speaking to the committee.
Oh, good afternoon. Lovely to see you.
And thank you. And certainly thank
you for the opportunity.
Um, we have filed submissions, um, and this is the Parole
and Prisoners Rights Committee
with the New Zealand Law Association.
So I won't go through all of those
because they're, um, they are enough for, for you all
to consider and, um, and take on board.
And we have summarized
what our main points are at paragraph 23.
What I would just briefly like to just, um,
highlight perhaps are just some of the important, um,
things, uh,
and just picking up on, um, one of the, um, the, um,
speakers is to, uh, we definitely suggest, um,
across the board everybody's rights, whoever is, um,
affected by these orders is affected by, um, these rules,
uh, have to be protected and have to be considered.
We are coming, uh, from a point of view
that we would be representing, uh, the, uh, people
who are subject to the orders.
But that doesn't mean to say we don't consider that, uh,
the other parties to these orders, uh,
don't have considerations and rights.
I don't don't want them to think that.
But what we really would like, um, to con, um,
consider is our, our Supreme Court has, uh, made a finding,
uh, and quite, quite a, a strong one for any society
is that, um, as the, um, PPO
and ESO regimes stand at the moment, um,
basically as a second penalty that they, that they can't,
as they are at the moment, be justified in a free
and democratic society.
And that's really our starting point.
And we, and we certainly want to clearly protect, um,
the rights, uh, and certainly of people who are detained
and incarcerated.
So, um, we would like, um, you the committee
to obviously respect the court's findings,
but also there are five main principles, um,
to guide your, you know, response
and the legislative response.
So that's one, obviously, protection of the community,
proportionality and individualization so that any conditions
are catered to the threats.
Somebody may pose what their, um, background is.
There'll be different, um, levels, um, of concern,
uh, but to provide, also provide rehabilitation
and reintegration that is a good, good ratings
and good programs will assist, um, the risk
of people going out and committing serious offenses again
and creating more victims, which none of us want.
And then just procedural fairness and transparency,
and that, that's really what the theme
of our submissions are, um, through there.
But we do, um, suggest is that it goes back to, um,
the legislature that goes back to parliament.
It's, um, where we're going to get the courts to try
and reinterpret this.
It's, uh, it's not the best way to put in place
what Parliament is really wanting
and what Parliament says this takes care of everybody's, uh,
protection of, uh, their safety and concerns.
But, and again, anything, um, at the moment,
retrospective application certainly
undermines, um, certainty.
So you'll see from, uh, our final, um,
wrap up as where our submissions is
that we would suggest not.
So, um, hopefully we just find
or hope that you find our submissions, um, helpful.
Um, but again, as I say is that, um, we're not, um,
we're representing those, uh, who are the subject of them
because that's, um, what our committee does,
but that doesn't undermine in any way that you, of course,
parliament needs to balance everybody's interest in society.
So we're not, um, we're not undermining that at all, but,
but we just feel that if we, our own Supreme Court has found
something that is, um, in conflict with our New Zealand Bill
of Rights, then, uh, certainly serious consideration
and re remedy needs to be certainly considered
and undertaking that's a, uh,
what we would say is quite a strong statement from
our Supreme Court. So
Thank you, Mr. Berg.
Now we've got any questions?
Um, okay, since This is from Ms. Ley,
Um, hello Marie.
Good afternoon. Good afternoon.
Uh, my question, um, is similar to, to what I posed to the,
um, to the, to the law Commission, um, moments ago.
I hear what we are all saying.
I, I understand the concerns from a technical, uh,
academic basis, uh,
and what, what you, um, said earlier, you,
you spoke about rehabilitation programs, et cetera,
and, um, to mitigate the risks of re-offending.
And the way I see it is the status quo
is mitigating risks of re-offending.
And for me, I, I just can't get past
my extreme passionate desire to protect victims.
They've already dealt with so much
and to protect them from the real risks of these, um,
uh, these offenders that have a high risk of re-offending.
And that's why I, I, I just, I feel we are focusing
so much on the academia as opposed to the practicalities.
And that's my, what, what what we would think.
Um, because our committee, of course has, um, very comprised
of very senior members trial, um, quite a number
of our have been prosecution, uh, as well as defense.
So we come really from dealing hands on
with, uh, with people who are really high at risk, um,
offenders, what, what, what is best, um, that we can offer
to du reduce the risk, uh, of them re-offending.
And, um, I know that some people out there, um, not us,
and not, not you, but they read what they see in the media
and they seem to think that people just get released,
um, very easily.
And our experiences, they don't,
the parole board is very serious about, uh,
releasing people, very high hurdle.
And we have clients that are present for a long time
and they have to go through these, uh, programs.
But the best way that we see is
that if we provide, um, deal with the causes,
um, of what they did,
and we deal in a really sort of, um, response to pro, um,
provide them with all sorts of things.
You know, drug free jobs, um, trauma free, you know,
just seeing what happens to the people in, um, the state
who were abused
and just the, the effect that the trauma has.
And it is long term, and we treat, I certainly do,
but a lot of us, we treat the parole law, um,
as a very tough area of law.
And, um, and people are not granted parole easily either.
Now, uh, sadly in any society,
you have very high risk offenders,
but we also have clients where we know they,
they can't be released, you know, that they effectively
are on sentences, preventive or life and so forth.
And sad as it may be, they will not ever be released.
And so, um, and we have,
and as lawyers, certainly defense lawyer, we live with that.
We also have high risk, um, offenders, but we try
and make sure that we battle all the way through
with corrections, um, to make sure
that whatever can possibly be utilized for these people.
Um, because if you can mend something, um, that's broken,
uh, and and really strictly monitor them, then
that definitely reduces the risk.
But certainly the, uh, victims are, um, are very well looked
after in the parole committee.
They, they can speak to the, um, the parole board.
They don't have to, um, tell us what they speak about
and they are listened to.
And, and we know that that's what we're up against.
And we know that our clients have to, uh, really come
to grips with how did they end up there
and how are they not going to offend again, it's not easily
that they are released.
We are just saying is that if that we go too far in
incarcerating people under the umbrella of human rights
and there's international human rights,
then we do have a duty as a, a fair
and democratic society to at least look
after those people as well, those who are targeted.
So that's, um, that's as much as I can say for there.
We, we certainly don't,
we certainly don't disregard the place of victims in all
of this and, and what they've suffered.
No question. But
It's sad that some of them will never be released.
I, well, I think if we're all, um, honest, you know, I,
I do have, um, some clients
and I just know they won't be released.
They know, we know it.
We, we, we don't, um, we don't identify them, but,
but we are realistic
and we just know that they, that they're too broken.
Okay. And everybody knows.
Hey, well thank you for joining us this afternoon.
I know you're very busy, but, um, it's been very good.
And, uh, that last, uh, answer was very helpful. Thank you.
Thank you. Have a good afternoon.
Thank you. And thanks for the
Opportunity. Right now
we've got, um, Mr. Lan, um, are you on your own?
I thought you were going to be joined by someone else,
Monique, is that right?
Or or are you on your own, Chris? No, um, Ms.
Dan has joined as well. Oh, right. Cool.
We got this afternoon. Thank you.
Alright, the floor is yours as it were.
Uh, thank you, um, to the committee, uh, uh,
my name is Monique Mefe and I'm here with Chris Macklin.
Um, I'm a member of the human rights, um,
and privacy committee for the New Zealand Law Society.
And Chris, uh, is the convener
for the Law Society's Criminal Law Committee, uh,
will be prevent, uh, presenting the submission in two parts.
I will speak very briefly at the beginning about the
significance of the declaration.
And then Mr. Macklin, I think we'll spend more time speaking
about the practical points, um, of where to from here, um,
as set out in our written submissions.
Um, the first point I'd like to make is about the importance
of the obligations at stake here.
And it's, the obvious one is obvi, is that
there's domestic human rights legislation
that issue our own Bill of Rights Act,
but the, the legislation sits within an
international law framework as well.
Um, human Rights Commission, uh, their submissions
to the committee touch on that,
those international obligations as well, in particular,
the International Covenant for Civil
and Political Rights that is relevant to the Declaration.
So New Zealand is subject to a, a Universal Periodic review,
uh, before the United Nations Human Rights Council.
And it's highly likely that this declaration
and the parliament's response to it will be relevant
to the Human Rights Council's consideration
of New Zealand's human Rights record.
Um, so it will have an impact, uh, that the response
to it in particular on New Zealand's international
reputation for upholding human rights.
Um, and the only other point I wanted to make,
which I think touches on some questions that I heard, um,
of the, uh, law association just, um,
before we came online, uh,
and that is that the Law society shares the view
of the Law Commission, which I'm sure you heard earlier
today, um, that this
and of the Supreme Court in, in chisel,
that the preventive measures for sexual
and violent offending has an important role to play,
protecting the community from harm,
and the law needs to provide for them.
And the question really is how do we do
that whilst also protecting New Zealand rights, um, sorry,
human rights and New Zealand's international reputation
for protecting human rights, even of, excuse me, our most,
um, often our most vulnerable, um,
members of society in prison.
So the law should continue to provide for them,
but the question is how,
and for that I will pass over to Chris to, um,
continue the Law Society submission.
Yes. Uh, thank you, Monique.
And, and, uh,
the Law Society arrives, um, at this, uh,
particular hearing, standing literally on the shoulders
of giants in terms of the academic analysis
and the very careful work that's gone before us today.
And you've already heard, I'm aware from the Law Commission,
uh, you've heard from, uh, the Law Association
and of course, professor Dean Knight as well.
And rather than sort of rehash that material, what we sought
to focus on in our written submission for you is just a sort
of pragmatic step back and look at the way forward.
We commend to this committee, the Law Commission's report
and conclusions in terms of where to,
but even putting that to one side, we identified two
main pathways that the committee could recommend
for further legislative work.
The first would be to change the sentencing regime
to accommodate preventive measures.
Um, and the second is to find a post sentencing regime,
so respectively called Pathways A and B and our submissions.
Um, we noted that there's a lot of work to do
to flesh out the details on either regime.
We also note and accept the law commission's findings,
that the latter being a post sentence regime change
would be preferable.
Um, so we keep a boot in each camp,
but obviously respect the law commission's view,
and note that there's just a lot of work required
to really flesh out what would be the key details
of whichever pathway that is, that's taken.
Uh, we've supplemented that
with some recommendations about interim,
so addressing issues with retrospective orders
that have been impugned by the chisel analysis, uh, making
or suggesting that, um, we find a way
to have high court review of existing, uh, such orders
and then changes to the,
the relevant acts being the Parole Act
and the, um, PPO Act to ensure
that they are framed explicitly towards least
restrictive outcomes.
Now, um, all of this material,
obviously in the written submission,
which we take is read very mindful of questions, but
before we get there, I just thought, um, it behooves me is,
um, Monique has done too to address some of the ly material
because I've been observing the, the hearing from, from one
and, um, for the criminal law committee
and criminal practitioners in particular, I just wanted to,
to note with the utmost respect, the false dichotomy
that can sneak in when reviewing this material from the
outside about victim versus offender.
Now, obviously, that's not a false dichotomy case to case.
So when one person hurts another,
and these are very serious cases that we're dealing
with here, the victim offender relationship, clear.
But when you take just one step back, the, the sort
of cliche that criminal practitioners have, both prosecutors
and defense counsel, and as a barrister,
I actually do both types of brief, is
that hurt people, hurt people.
And so when we're talking about having a victim's focus,
having a victim lens
and making sure that we protect people,
that doesn't just mean locking up people
and throwing away the key.
It means preventing future harm.
Because the reality is that, you know, subject, even
to Ms Berg's comments earlier, for the vast majority
of prisoners, there is going to be a statutory release date.
They are going to be released.
And if you don't find a way to balance rehabilitative needs
and prospects with protection,
then you're not really protecting people
by just locking away offenders and keeping them inside
and then tiffing them out at the end of a sentence.
And so I speak very loosely there,
but I just wanted to point out
that the idea in a holistic way is to find a balance
where the preventive measures both serve to keep
existing victims safe, but also prevent future victimization
through effective rehabilitation.
And that's where the balance is.
No one in this conversation is talking about
removing preventive measures.
There's academic and organization, consensus,
law Association, law Society, law Commission,
that preventive measures serve a purpose and are needed.
What is required though, is that balance to ensure
that they are effective and justified.
And in the broadest sense, the issues with justification
can be in large parts, come down to the effectiveness
of rehabilitative efforts versus the punitive nature
of ongoing restrictions.
And so the Supreme Court has accepted,
you can impose preventive orders, they do restrict rights,
and that can be justified if,
and it's the, if that really will require quite a lot more
detailed analysis and work,
because they can be justified if
the restrictive measures are imposed
to effectively manage risk and rehabilitate people.
So, uh, I just,
and I'm sort of getting ahead of the questions there,
but I just need, we,
We do have a couple of questions, so thank you Ms.
Macklin. First, uh, question is from, uh, Ms.
Vols, uh, thank you both for the submission.
And, and thank you also, Chris, for those,
your general thoughts as well,
which I think are incredibly important
for us to bear in mind.
Um, I lean towards your option B, um,
but also one of the, the levers
that I think can help in terms of determining reasonableness
or not, uh, procedural measures we can put in place.
So this is the duration of the order itself, the period
of the review, uh, whether it's possible
to initiate a review in between ordinary periods,
and who can do that, whether it's, um,
the individual concern, whether it's a victim,
whether it's corrections.
Um, I noted that I think it was your submission
that set up the three year period for ordinary review,
or maybe it was the law commission,
but I, I wonder if you could just generally comment about
the period of the order, the period of ordinary review,
and any views on initiation of a review
between those standard periods.
Um, I, I can only comment in the broader sense in the
sense that we recommend a process of review.
Um, forgive me, I did review my notes before one,
but I don't recall us proposing a term as such.
And I think the society really is here to say
these mechanisms are important.
Things like review and a proper process are important,
but the details need a lot more work.
Um, and so it wouldn't be for me to stand in
and give you any of those details when I think our main
position is that, that the best work comes ahead of us
in terms of setting up a robust review process.
Um, I, I'd pause to note that it's a, a little,
if we use the model like parole,
and look, I think I can say safely, um, my own view
as opposed to the societies is that pathway B is preferable,
and I know the law commission go that way as well.
Um, I don't think the society
advocates either pathway though.
We just note that those are the only practical ways
to address the declaration.
And so however it's done, if we lean into that sort
of parole model, then it could be that all
of those parties you listed, victim offender, um, court
or parole board itself, could all initiate a review if,
if the regime is geared that way.
Okay. We're gonna have the last question
because we're running outta time,
but, um, we've had plenty of time.
So Dr. Nan actually, uh, sorry.
Chair, I think, I think
Chris has answered that particularly.
All right. Okay, cool. Yeah, really, really well. Right.
Anyone else with another question? I think we're good, Pete.
Look, um, again, everyone, you, you can't hear,
but everyone's acknowledging a great submission.
I want to thank you both for coming on board.
We've had, uh, four very powerful submissions today,
which has been very helpful for our thinking.
So thank you for joining us. Thank you. Thank you both.
Thank you. Very, thank you. Yeah.
Professor, I'm gonna have to ask you to leave.
Um, not 'cause we don't want you, but, um, but thank you.
Thank you for coming.